there are all sorts of things that
happen every day that might make you ask
why why do we drive on a Parkway and
park on a driveway why does my hair get
frizzy when it's humid and why do my
fingers get all pruney when they're wet
often we simply can't know the answers
to these questions but progress can
often be made and when it comes to your
pruney fingers scientists have a few
interesting ideas the story here begins
with an observation made in the 1930s in
the emergency room doctors noticed that
patients with nerve damage to their
hands did not get pruney finger tips
like most of us do in the bath which
might make you wonder why would primates
want wrinkly fingers presumably when
it's rainy or doing what could this
trait before what if these wrinkles
functioned like rain treads think about
car tires when the ground is dry it's
generally best to have smooth tires and
racecars do
smooth tires means more rubber or
surface area in contact with the road
which gives them better grip but in
rainy and muddy conditions it's a
different story and here's where treads
come into play treads reduce the amount
of rubber on the road but they help
channel out water when it rains lowering
the risk of hydroplaning well if your
fingers really are like rain treads you
should be able to predict the optimal
shape for them right so what would the
predicted wrinkle shapes be that is our
our prunes actually the right shape to
be rain treads let's take a detour into
rivers when we think of river networks
we usually imagine lots of smaller river
channels joining to make larger river
channels downstream which is what
happens in concave basins in these cases
that divides the regions between the
river segments are disconnected from one
another and diverge away from one
another uphill but River networks look
fundamentally different on convex
promontories or protrusions here the
river channels are disconnected from one
another and diverge away from one
another downstream not very River like
in these cases it's the divides that
link together to form a tree with it
trunk up hill at the top of the
promontory here it's the divides that
look more traditionally river like if
our pruney fingers our drainage networks
designed the channel out water when we
grip then we expect to find similar
shapes on our fingers as we find out
there among rivers there should be a
tree network of divides or ridges with
their trunk near the top of the
fingertip and with their more leafy
parts reaching out downhill away from
the tip the channels themselves through
which the water is channeled during a
grip should not connect to one another
and instead should diverge away from one
another down who if pruney fingers are
trained treads then they should look
like the river networks on convex
promontories in fact that's exactly the
morphology we find among pruney fingers
when we grip then our pruning wrinkles
really do channel out the water but does
it actually help us grip new behavioral
experiments have shown that they do in a
task where subjects had to grasp wet
marbles and move them through a hole and
out the other side
those with pruney fingers finished the
task significantly faster than those
with smooth fingers pruney fingers not
only ought to enhance grip in wet
conditions but do so
pruney fingers may be a crucial part of
the primate repertoire maybe once
primates lost their claws in favor of
fingernails rain treads were needed to
deal with the especially challenging
often wet grip heavy forest habitats by
looking closely at the mysteries in our
world and trying to find things that
look similar like our wet fingers and
rain treads we can come up with ideas
about what's happening and that's a good
way to think about all sorts of
questions in life too
you